+++
title = "The invisible macro transcriber constrain"
date = 2023-09-25
+++

_Disclaimer_: this post is rather small. I don't have time to expand further.

# Introduction

I always described macro rules as a bunch of "tokens to tokens" functions.
For instance, `rustdoc` generates the following documentation for `anyhow!`
macro:

```rust
// https://docs.rs/anyhow/1.0.75/anyhow/macro.anyhow.html
macro_rules! anyhow {
    ($msg:literal $(,)?) => { ... };
    ($err:expr $(,)?) => { ... };
    ($fmt:expr, $($arg:tt)*) => { ... };
}
```

I read the first rule as a function that generates _a piece of AST_ from a
literal. Likewise, I represented the second rule as a function that generates
_a piece of AST_ from an expression, and so on.

# The problem

Let's take a smaller example that better suits this blogpost:

```rust
macro_rules! foo {
    ($($id:ident)*) => { ... };
}
```

I read this rule as a function that generates _a piece of AST_ from zero or more
identifiers. In other words, the only repetition constraints are stated in the
macro matcher itself.

Well, well, well. WELL.

I was wrong.

It turns out that it is possible to add some repetition constraints in the macro
transcriber itself. For instance, we can provide a transcriber that requires at
least one identifier to be passed to our `foo` macro:

```rust
macro_rules! foo {
    ($($id:ident)*) => {{
        $( foo!(@discard $id); )+ // <-- ⚠️
    }};
    
    // Don't look at this - it's just a clean way to discard tokens.
    (@discard $tt:tt) => {}
}
```

By using a `+` as a repetition operator in the transcription, we added a new
constraint (there must be at least one identifier) that is not represented in
the macro matcher (and not shown in `rustdoc`).

Let's test it with different amounts of identifiers:

```rust
fn main() {
    foo!();
    foo!(a);
    foo!(a b);
    foo!(a b c);
}
```

Compiling this emits the following error ([playground link]):

[playground link]: https://play.rust-lang.org/?gist=30e50b882b3b373ceb3bd9b9a3ca31d9

```text
error: this must repeat at least once
 --> src/main.rs:3:10
  |
3 |         $( foo!(@discard $id); )+ // <-- ⚠️
  |          ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

This shows that the assumption that all the repetition constraints are stated in
the macro matcher is wrong, which means that we can't trust the documentation
generated by `rustdoc` to tell if a macro invocation matches a given set of
repetition constraints.

# Closing thoughts

This kind of pattern is quite easy to spot. It would be great to have a tool
that checks that the repetition operator defined in the macro matcher matches
the repetition operator defined in the macro transcriber. A tool with a silly
pun in its name, with a huge picture of an American actor in its README.
